Extend ROS resource addressing design document (#241)
ros2/design: articles/140_resource_names.md

---
layout: default
title: Resource Names

> permalink: articles/resource_names.html

Reviewer: I'm hesitant to rename the permalink, maybe we can setup a redirect? I just don't want to break existing links if we can help it.

Author: Sure, we can! See redirect in 7680627ee8f2fa8675fd58e72f814585c6721f2a.

---
layout: default
title: Resource Names
permalink: articles/resource_names.html
redirect_from: articles/topic_and_service_names.html
abstract:

>   This article describes an specification proposal for resource addressing in ROS, as well as its implementation in a DDS setting.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  This article describes a specification proposal for resource addressing in ROS, as well as its implementation in a DDS setting.
```

Author: Corrected in c753fe9dd2f9bdfe03f92245cab4c80b932a70ed.

Original Author: {{ page.author }}

## Background

### Concepts

> #### Content-oriented resources

Reviewer: I think it would be good to motivate our use of this terminology (and potentially change it if something else fits better). There is some stuff on wikipedia, but it's mostly focused on specific technologies like actually implementing internet networks using named resources or are tightly coupled to web technologies:

- https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Content-addressable_storage#Content-addressed_vs._location-addressed
- https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Content_centric_networking
- https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Information-centric_networking
- https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Named_data_networking
- https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Resource-oriented_architecture

I had trouble finding an article which summarized the basic difference in addressing between having a host and not. The URI page talks about host and path, and that host is optional:

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Uniform_Resource_Identifier#Definition

I don't think we need to spend much time here, but a few citations might lend credibility to the distinction we're making here.

Author: > I think it would be good to motivate our use of this terminology

I agree, and I think that CCN (Content Centric Networking) gets pretty close. A related [Linux Foundation project](https://wiki.fd.io/view/Cicn) adds Publish/Subscribe Networking as a potential alias for the same concept. See 7680627ee8f2fa8675fd58e72f814585c6721f2a.

> The URI page talks about host and path, and that host is optional:

For URIs, a host is always defined, either explicitly or implicitly through a sane default e.g. `localhost` for `file://` URIs, see [RFC 3986 Section 3.2.2](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc3986#section-3.2.2).

Content-oriented resources are not bound to any particular node in a given system.
ROS topics, which may be freely published or subscribed to by multiples ROS nodes, fall under this classification.

> Note that in ROS 1, every resource i.e. topics, services, actions and parameters, is a content-oriented resource.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note that in ROS 1, every resource, i.e. topics, services, actions, and parameters, is a content-oriented resource.
```

Author: Corrected in 7680627ee8f2fa8675fd58e72f814585c6721f2a.

#### Host-oriented resources

Host-oriented resources are provided by a node in a given system and thus are bound to it.

> Multiple resources with the same name and type may by provided by different nodes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Multiple resources with the same name and type may be provided by different nodes.
```

Author: Corrected in 7680627ee8f2fa8675fd58e72f814585c6721f2a.

Therefore, the provider node name is necessary to unambiguously address a host-oriented resource.
In the preceding, it is assumed that node name uniqueness has been ensured by means not prescribed in this document.

> ROS services, actions and parameters fall under this classification.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
ROS services, actions, and parameters fall under this classification.
```

Subjective, but we use the Oxford comma in other documents, so I recommend it here for consistency.

Author: Sounds good. Added in 7680627ee8f2fa8675fd58e72f814585c6721f2a.

```

#### DDS Topic Names

In DDS, topic names restrictions include:

*From DDS 1.4 specification, or [RTI documentation](http://community.rti.com/rti-doc/510/ndds/doc/html/api_cpp/group__DDSQueryAndFilterSyntaxModule.html):*

```
TOPICNAME - A topic name is an identifier for a topic, and is defined as any series of characters 'a', ..., 'z', 'A', ..., 'Z', '0', ..., '9', '_' but may not start with a digit.
```

*Note:* the DDS specification has a known typo, where it says `-` are allowed, but the RTI documentation correctly lists `_` as allowed.

Additionally, DDS - or more precisely the underlaying RTPS protocol - has a hard limit on topic names of 256 characters, so an additional goal is to minimize the number of extra characters used when mapping from ROS to DDS names.
See The Real-time Publish-Subscribe Protocol (RTPS) DDS Interoperability Wire Protocol Specification, Table 9.12 for more details.

## Uniform Resource Locators (URLs)

Resources are addressed by means of the [Uniform Resource Locators (URL)](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Uniform_Resource_Locator) format.

### Syntax Components

> #### Provider Names

Reviewer: This goes along with the other comment I made, I think we should consider adopting the URI terminology where it makes sense. Would `host` make more sense than `provider` in this case? I'm not 100% sure, but I'd like to know your opinion.

Author: So, the rationale here is that since nodes provide services instead of hosting data it made more sense to use the former terminology, but the distinction is subtle. I'm fine with `host` too. See 7680627ee8f2fa8675fd58e72f814585c6721f2a.

Reviewer: Yeah, I don't feel strongly about it, host is fine and I would be ok with provider as well so long as there is a rationale and it's not arbitrary.

> For host-oriented resources i.e. services, actions and parameters, the provider name refers to the node that is exposing said resources.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For host-oriented resources, i.e. services, actions, and parameters, the provider name refers to the node that is exposing said resources.
```

Author: Corrected in 7680627ee8f2fa8675fd58e72f814585c6721f2a.

##### Definition

> A provider name is made up of one or more tokens, delimited by periods (`.`) i.e. using URL hostname style syntax.

Reviewer: The structure of this is covered by FQDN's I think (https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fully_qualified_domain_name) if you want another citation.

Reviewer: We use the "fully qualified [node] name" phrase in places already.

Author: Corrected in 7680627ee8f2fa8675fd58e72f814585c6721f2a.

Each token:

- must not be empty.
- may use alphanumeric characters (`[0-9|a-z|A-Z]`) and/or underscores (`_`) only.

> - must not start with numeric characters (`[0-9]`).

Reviewer: Are they also not allowed to have `__` in the name? I think that might be a restriction for node names and/or namespaces right now.

Author: That's right. Added missing constraint in 7680627ee8f2fa8675fd58e72f814585c6721f2a.

As a consequence, a provider name:

- must not contain any number of repeated periods (`.`), e.g. the name `foo..bar` is not allowed.
  - rationale: it removes the chance for accidental `..` from concatenation and therefore the need to collapse `..` to `.`.
  
Additionally, a provider name must not end nor start with a period (`.`).

The last token in a provider name is its base name and any preceding tokens make up its namespace.
For example, a `foo.bar.baz` provider name is made up of `foo`, `bar` and `baz` tokens, and refers to a node in the `foo.bar` namespace whose base name is `baz`.

#### Resource Names

> All resources, whether content-oriented or host-oriented, have a name.

Reviewer: I like name myself, but again looking to converge on "standard" terminology, I believe this would be referred to as the `path` in URI parlance. Perhaps just an aside the first time we mention it (here)? Like `have a name (the 'path' of the URI)`? I don't know what would be more appropriate, I just wanted to bring it up.

Author: I agree with establishing a relationship between resource name and path, but I wouldn't switch to URI parlance. Talking about topic paths coming from a ROS 1 background is somewhat awkward. See 7680627ee8f2fa8675fd58e72f814585c6721f2a.

Note the triple forward slash (`/`), which is a similar style to the `file://` scheme.
A relative name `foo/bar` could would be represented (as a topic) with `rostopic://foo/bar`.
The last token in a provider name is its base name and any preceding tokens make up its namespace.
For example, a `foo.bar.baz` provider name is made up of `foo`, `bar` and `baz` tokens, and refers to a node in the `foo.bar` namespace whose base name is `baz`.

### ROS 2 Name Examples
#### Resource Names

For example, these are valid names:
All resources, whether content-oriented or host-oriented, have a name.

| `foo`      | `abc123`   | `_foo`  | `Foo`               | `BAR`                |
| `~`        | `foo/bar`  | `~/foo` | `{foo}_bar`         | `foo/{ping}/bar`     |
| `foo/_bar` | `foo_/bar` | `foo_`  | `rosservice:///foo` | `rostopic://foo/bar` |
##### Definition

But these are not valid names:
A resource name is made up of one or more tokens, delimited by forward slashes (`/`) i.e. using URL path style syntax.

| `123abc`    | `123`  | `foo bar`  | ` `        | `foo//bar` |
| `/~`        | `~foo` | `foo~`     | `foo~/bar` | `foo/~bar` |

> | `foo/~/bar` | `foo/` | `foo__bar` |            |            |

Reviewer: Hmm, this (`foo__bar`) was in the "not valid name" list, but I didn't see it in the bullet points any where. I know it was part of a previous alternative we tried (described at the bottom of the document), but I wonder if the code checks for this still...

Reviewer: Looks like not, so forget my previous comment: https://github.com/ros2/rcl/blob/21ff57b14b6f406d948f6e9ea97db75a1b2004ef/rcl/src/rcl/validate_topic_name.c#L97-L99

Author: I cleaned up the examples table and removed the `foo__bar` entry in 7680627ee8f2fa8675fd58e72f814585c6721f2a.

- operating on a subset of all matching resources if no resource type and/or no provider name (if it applies) are specified e.g. calling an `add_two_ints` service may result in the first service found being called or all of them being called and the first response received returned.

#### Regular Resource Names (RRNs)

Regular resource names allow for a number of context dependent resolution mechanisms.

*Note*: this applies to resource names and not to provider names, which are always fully qualified.

##### Relative names resolution

Content-oriented resource names may be absolute or relative.

An absolute name begins with a forward slash (`/`) and it's not affected by the addressing node's namespace.
It can be regarded as a _global_ name, or a name at the _root_ namespace.

A relative name does not begin with a forward slash (`/`) and it is resolved _relative_ to the addressing node's namespace.
Periods (`.`) in the addressing node's namespace are replaced by forward slashes (`/`) and a leading forward slash (`/`) is added during resolution.

> For example, if a `ping.pong.ball` node addresses (e.g. subscribes to) a `foo/bar` topic, then the topic name will be resolved to `/ping/pong/foo/bar`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, if a node with the address `ping.pong.ball` publishes or subscribes to a topic `foo/bar`, then the topic name will be resolved to `/ping/pong/foo/bar`.
```

Author: Corrected in 7680627ee8f2fa8675fd58e72f814585c6721f2a.

It must be used at the beginning of a non-fully qualified name, if at all.

Here is a table with some example expansions:

| **Name** | **Node** : `my_node` | **Node** : `my_ns.my_node` |
|----------|----------------------|----------------------------|
| `ping`   | *`/ping`*            | *`/my_ns/ping`*            |
| `/ping`  | *`/ping`*            | *`/ping`*                  |
| `~`      | *`/my_node`*         | *`/my_ns/my_node`*         |
| `~/ping` | *`/my_node/ping`*    | *`/my_ns/my_node/ping`*    |

Note that the private namespace substitution character makes the name absolute, and therefore the namespace is not added a second time.

##### Substitutions

The bracket syntax (`{substitution_name}`) may be used in resource names to substitute useful contextual information into the them.
The set of substitution keys (names) are not set in this document, but some reasonable examples might be `{node}`, expanding to the addressing node's name, or `{ns}`, expanding to the addressing node's namespace.

Substitutions must result in a valid name and comply with the name constraints.

> An example of an invalid substitution would be `{sub}/foo` and replace `{sub}` with a numeric value, which thus leads to a (invalid) resource name starting with a numeric character.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
An example of an invalid substitution would be `{sub}/foo` and replace `{sub}` with a numeric value, which thus leads to an *invalid* resource name starting with a numeric character.
```

Author: Corrected in 7680627ee8f2fa8675fd58e72f814585c6721f2a.

This is implicitly enforced by the rules above that say substitution names may only contain alphanumerics and underscores (`_`).
For example, given the name `{% raw %}/foo/{{bar}_baz}{% endraw %}` would result in an error because `{` and `}` are not allowed in a substitution names and the substitution name `{bar}_baz` does contain them.

#### Fully Qualified Resource Names (FQRNs)

> Regular resource names resolution rules allow for convenient syntax, which in some cases requires additional context to expand to a fully qualified name that can be mapped to e.g. a DDS topic name.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Regular resource name resolution rules allow for convenient syntax, which in some cases requires additional context to expand to a fully qualified name that can be mapped to another type of name, e.g. a DDS topic name.
```

Author: Corrected in 7680627ee8f2fa8675fd58e72f814585c6721f2a.

For example, as outlined in further detail in the preceding sections, resource names may be relative (e.g. `foo` versus the absolute `/foo`), they may contain the private namespace substitution character (`~`), or arbitrary substitutions in curly braces (`{}`) syntax.
With enough context, each of these features can be expanded to some simple string to form the fully qualified name.

Fully qualified names have these additional restrictions:

- must start with a forward slash (`/`), i.e. they must be absolute.
- must not contain tilde (`~`) nor balanced curly braces (`{}`).

### Resource Qualification

#### Hidden nodes

> If a (resource provider) node name contains any tokens that start with an underscore (`_`), the node it refers to will be considered hidden and tools may not show them unless explicitly asked to.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If a node name (a.k.a. resource provider) contains any tokens that start with an underscore (`_`), the node it refers to will be considered hidden and tools may not show them unless explicitly asked to do so.
```

Author: Corrected in 7680627ee8f2fa8675fd58e72f814585c6721f2a.

#### Hidden resources

> If a resource name contains any tokens that start with an underscore (`_`), the resource it refers to will be considered hidden and tools may not show them unless explicitly asked to.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If a resource name contains any tokens that start with an underscore (`_`), the resource it refers to will be considered hidden and tools may not show them unless explicitly asked to do so.
```

Author: Corrected in 7680627ee8f2fa8675fd58e72f814585c6721f2a.

| `~`        | `foo/bar`  | `~/foo` | `{foo}_bar`         | `foo/{ping}/bar`     |
| `foo/_bar` | `foo_/bar` | `foo_`  | `rosservice:///foo` | `rostopic://foo/bar` |
| `foo/_bar` | `foo_/bar` | `foo_`  | `rosservice:///foo` | `rostopic://foo/bar` |

But these are not valid names:

| `123abc`    | `123`  | `foo bar`  | ` `        | `foo//bar` |
| `/~`        | `~foo` | `foo~`     | `foo~/bar` | `foo/~bar` |
| `foo/~/bar` | `foo/` | `foo__bar` |            |            |

These are some valid fully qualified names:

| `/foo`                    | `rosparam://another.node/bool_param` | `rostopic:///ping`                 | `/_private/thing`                  |
| `rosaction://a.node/ping` | `/bar/baz`                           | `/public_namespace/_private/thing` | `rosservice://_private.node/reset` |

### Summary

For convenience, here is a summary of all the rules that apply to URLs in ROS.

Provider names in a URL:

- may contain alphanumeric characters (`[0-9|a-z|A-Z]`), underscores (`_`) and periods (`.`).
- must not start with a numeric character (`[0-9]`).
- must not end nor start with a period (`.`).
- must not contain any number of repeated periods (`.`).

> - must not contain any number of repeated underscores (`_`).

Reviewer: So this is back :D. We should figure out what we're doing here and be consistent. Unless I missed it this wasn't a constraint mentioned above. I think we may have wanted to keep it to allow us to have a "safe" delimiter to use in the future, but it looks like the code doesn't check this, at least for topics.

Author: Made this constraint explicit everywhere else in 7680627ee8f2fa8675fd58e72f814585c6721f2a. Do you think we shouldn't?

Reviewer: Hmm, not sure. I think we only _needed_ it for the alternative we're no longer using. I don't think the code enforces it at the moment. Maybe it should be removed. @sloretz or anyone on the @ros2/team do you have an opinion here?

Reviewer 2: I don't have a strong preference. But it seems okay to remove the constraint if there's no reason to have it. If we really need it in the future, we could start using repeated `.` as a delimiter since it's already disallowed.

Resource names in a URL:

- must not be empty.
- may contain alphanumeric characters (`[0-9|a-z|A-Z]`), underscores (`_`), and forward slashes (`/`).
- may use balanced curly braces (`{}`) in the resource name for substitutions.
- may start with a tilde (`~`), the private namespace substitution character.
- must not start with a numeric character (`[0-9]`).
- must not end with a forward slash (`/`).
- must not contain any number of repeated forward slashes (`/`).
- must not contain any number of repeated underscores (`_`).
- must separate a tilde (`~`) from the rest of the name with a forward slash (`/`), i.e. `~/foo` not `~foo`.
- must have balanced curly braces (`{}`) when used, i.e. `{sub}/foo` but not `{sub/foo` nor `/foo}`.

The content of substitutions, i.e. the string in side of balanced curly braces (`{}`), follow very similar rules to names.
The content of substitutions:

- must not be empty.
- may contain alphanumeric characters (`[0-9|a-z|A-Z]`) and underscores (`_`).
- must not start with a numeric character (`[0-9]`).

## Mapping Resource Names to DDS Concepts

### Naming Constraints 

#### Allowed characters

> ROS URL syntax allows for more characters than e.g. DDS topic names allow: the forward slash (`/`), the tilde (`~`), the balanced curly braces (`{}`), the period (`.`) and the semicolon (`:`).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The ROS URL syntax allows for more characters than are allowed in DDS topic names.
For example, the forward slash (`/`), the tilde (`~`), the balanced curly braces (`{}`), the period (`.`) and the semicolon (`:`) are all allowed in the ROS URL syntax, but are not allowed in DDS topic names.
```

and actually we are using `/` in the DDS topic names, we just have a understanding with the DDS vendors that in the future they will update the standard to allow at least `/` in addition to the current constraints. And for now, all the implementations allow us to use them.

Reviewer: I see your not below now, maybe we should mention that earlier, like in the DDS topic name restrictions overview near the beginning of the article.

Author: Corrected phrasing, moved the note and took away forward slashes as a forbidden character in DDS topic names in 7680627ee8f2fa8675fd58e72f814585c6721f2a.

> These must be substituted or otherwise removed during the process of converting a ROS URL to e.g. a DDS topic name.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These must be substituted or otherwise removed during the process of converting a ROS URL to another kind of name, e.g. a DDS topic name.
```

Author: Corrected in 7680627ee8f2fa8675fd58e72f814585c6721f2a.

| `/public_namespace/_private/thing` | `rosservice://_private.node/reset`   |

### Summary

For convenience, here is a summary of all the rules that apply to URLs in ROS.

Host names in a URL:

- may contain alphanumeric characters (`[0-9|a-z|A-Z]`), underscores (`_`) and periods (`.`).
- must not start with a numeric character (`[0-9]`).
- must not end nor start with a period (`.`).
- must not contain any number of repeated periods (`.`).
- must not contain any number of repeated underscores (`_`).

Resource names in a URL:

- must not be empty.
- may contain alphanumeric characters (`[0-9|a-z|A-Z]`), underscores (`_`), and forward slashes (`/`).
- may use balanced curly braces (`{}`) in the resource name for substitutions.
- may start with a tilde (`~`), the private namespace substitution character.
- must not start with a numeric character (`[0-9]`).
- must not end with a forward slash (`/`).
- must not contain any number of repeated forward slashes (`/`).
- must not contain any number of repeated underscores (`_`).
- must separate a tilde (`~`) from the rest of the name with a forward slash (`/`), i.e. `~/foo` not `~foo`.

> - must have balanced curly braces (`{}`) when used, i.e. `{sub}/foo` but not `{sub/foo` nor `/foo}`.

Reviewer 2: Is this point redundant with L280?

Author: Good catch. Removed in c753fe9dd2f9bdfe03f92245cab4c80b932a70ed.

Periods (`.`) in host names must be transformed into another suitable character e.g. the forward slash `/`, as it is done when resolving relative resource names.
Type schemes must also be removed after parsing and before mapping can take place.

#### Name Length Limit

The length of a DDS topic name must not exceed 256 characters. Therefore the length of a ROS topic name, including the namespace hierarchy, the base name of the topic and any ros specific prefixes must not exceed 256 characters since this is mapped directly as DDS topic.

##### Considerations for RTI Connext

While testing our implementation with Connext, we encountered some additional limitations when it comes to the topic length.
That is, for example the length of a service name has tighter limits than the length of a topic.
In the RTI Connext implementation, service names are suffixed with the GUID value of the DDS participant for the service response topic.
Additionally, a content filtered topic (max length 256 characters) is created which is mapped from the suffixed service name.

> Therefore when linking against `rmw_connext_c` or `rmw_connext_cpp`, service names cannot be longer than 185 characters including the namespace hierarchy and any ros specific prefixes.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Therefore when linking against `rmw_connext_c` or `rmw_connext_cpp`, service names cannot be longer than 185 characters including the namespace hierarchy and any ROS specific prefixes.
```

Author: Corrected in c753fe9dd2f9bdfe03f92245cab4c80b932a70ed.
